hi welcome to Chitty more yoga calm I'm
kidding more I have a practice I'd love
to share with you today I picked this
one in particular because it's a sutra
from patanjali yoga sutras that is often
skipped by yoga teachers they really
don't very often explain this one in
class because it requires a little time
to explain it and also because a lot of
yoga teachers don't know that there is
an actual practice the Patanjali is
asking you to do in this Sutra so for my
beginner yoga students out there I just
want you to know that the yoga sutras
are a practice manual that's what they
are they're designed for us to actually
have practices that we're supposed to do
it's an explanation of yoga but it's
also a beautiful practice manual and I'm
going to explain one of those practices
to you tonight so what I'm talking about
is the second of the three sutras by
Patanjali that read that are in
reference to your physical practice so
the first suit that tells you what to do
and how to do it the second Sutra tells
you what your focus is and then asks you
to shift that right and then the third
one tells you what the benefits are for
doing the first two so we're going to
leave the third one aside because
honestly that one's a whole video in and
of itself so we're going to focus on
those first two tonight and especially
the second one because again the second
one is the one that people don't usually
end up covering in a class so I want to
cover it for you now and that suit that
it is by releasing effort and fixing the
mind on the infinite asana is perfected
yeah that's why they don't do it in yoga
class right it requires a little
explanation it requires a little kind of
wrapping your head around what it is
Patanjali is asking you to do so but as
with all of the sutras the clues really
lie in what came before so we're going
to go to the one before this that refers
to your awesome of practice and that's
the one that every yoga teacher loves
right stidham sukham awesome I astana
oh that should be done with sukham which
most people translate into ease or
sweetness but it literally means good
space and we'll get to that in a second
and Stidham and Stidham means steadiness
and stability and we're going to talk
about that on multiple levels so let's
go back to that sukham so your your
posture should be done with sukham with
good space so what does that mean it
means you want to do your poses in such
a way that allows for the breath to fro
flow freely throughout your entire body
you want the breath there'd be lots of
space right in the body for you to
breathe into so that the prana the life
force in your body can flow freely
throughout the entire system the blood
is flowing freely nutrient value is
getting everywhere oxygen all of that is
happening so how do we find good space
in our postures well good alignment
right that's why your teacher is trying
to align your poses that's why they're
giving you those specific cues so that
you can go into a pose and have good
space so and that's why your teacher
gives you may be a block underneath your
hand and your triangle pose because he
or she may be noticing that you're a
little constricted right on that side so
they want to open the space they want to
allow you to be able to breathe and to
that side of your lungs and open up the
muscles in that area so oxygen and
getting in there right blood flow is
getting in there so we're aligning our
poses in such a way that gives us good
space right now we want student that's
stability that's steadiness in the poses
and we get that through both muscular
effort and through the use of our bondas
right and again the Bundys are another
video but we're going to talk about your
muscles right now we're going to talk
about muscular action so what you're
doing is you're strengthening up your
muscles and you're lengthening them
you're opening them out and getting some
you know is some nice flexibility in the
body as well so stability comes from
both muscular
action right and that release of tension
in the muscles so that we can open
everything up so practice practice is
where we get stability we develop
strength we develop flexibility and in
those first couple years when you're
doing your practice right you get a
little shaky especially in the new poses
right every time something new comes
into the practice your muscles shake a
little bit right so we're not quite as
steady but as we progressed we get
steadier and more stable not only
physically but mentally as well you know
you come into yoga class at the end of
the day right and you you've been
multitasking all day long and then you
come in you get down on your mat and the
teacher begins to give you cues and now
you're on one task right you're
following the flow of the cues you're
watching your body you are taking one
movement at a time one breath at a time
so we're on task one task and the mind
begins to slow down it begins to quiet
it begins to focus so now the mind
becomes more stable in the practice so
we have some space we have some
stability right and now we go to that
next supra right and at the beginning of
the Sutra it says by relaxing effort so
now we know what that effort is it's the
effort to find good space and defied
stability but now Patanjali is asking
you to release that to relax it to let
it go so the question has to be why we
spent a lot of time working on that
effort right getting all that going so
why do we suddenly want to release this
well the reason is while you're doing
that physical practice right as the
teacher is calling out externally rotate
your right thigh your mind is saying
that's my thigh I me the physical me and
my thoughts my brain is now going to
rotate my thigh so with every
action we're now identifying with our
finite self we're identifying with the
body we're identifying with the mind
we're identifying with our thought right
and those things even though you know we
identify as we walk around each day
we're thinking this is me write my body
my mind yoga tells us that it's not
right yoga tells us that this is the
finite you write your body and your mind
and your thoughts or the finite you so
now Patanjali wants you to release the
effort from those you know you're
putting into kind of doing all of that
you know finding the space finding the
stability because now you have it right
you've got the space you've got the
stability so we don't need that much
effort put in that direction because now
all of that effort is really helping us
to identify with the finite self so
let's fix the mind instead on the
infinite so by releasing effort and
fixing the mind on the infinite so we
have to ask ourselves what is the
infinite and how do we fix our mind on
it well the infinite is you it's the
infinite you right it's the you that has
always been and always will be it's the
you that is not defined and confined by
the finite self by the body and the mind
it's the soul so but Anjali is now
asking you to kind of step away from all
of that physical effort and keep doing
the poses yes but now fix the mind on
the infinite you so how do we do that
well there's one thing that's always
available to you and it is the greatest
tool for doing any part of your yoga
practice believe me swami rama said that
the link between the physical body and
the mind is the breath and the breath is
the tool we're going to use now to fix
our minds on the infinite self so while
we're doing our astana practice we're
going to take that effort now that we
were putting into all of
other stuff and we're going to put it
right on the breath and you're using
your guggi breathing hopefully and
you're listening to the sound of your
own breathing and now you're going to
let those movements ride the breath like
a wave so all of our movements now are
rising and falling with the breath we're
smoothing out our transitions so that
we're using the breath to help us make
that transition from one pose to the
other right and the awesome to practice
is now becoming a kind of moving
meditation we're smoothing out the cycle
of the breath so that the inhale is
moving directly into exhale exhale
directly back and to inhale we're
smoothing the hiccups the little gaps in
the breath right those little tiny you
know kind of jumps and starts and the
breath we smooth those over now so it's
a slow and smooth transition and we're
just flowing on that breath and now when
you're doing that what's happening is
pratyahara now proxy ha rey's withdrawal
from the senses and it's not something
you can do it's the result of doing
something else in this case it's the
result of doing your postures now while
focussing your awareness on your breath
and allowing those smooth movements to
ride the breath and the breath now is
smooth as can be and now we are really
established we are really present
physically mentally and energetically in
that practice and when we're in that
beautiful state of presence then the
mind is fixed on the infinite self on
that beautiful infinite state of being
so if you want to kind of take this into
your own physical practice I've got a
couple of suggestions for you right oh I
almost forgot the third part got to go
back the last part awesome it is
perfected right so when we do this
practice asana is perfected why is it
perfected because now you're awesome and
practice has
become the perfect form of preparation
for meditation right we are using our
practice to open up the body let that
energy flow and now we have access to
that energy right and we can use all of
that in our meditations in our kriyas
whatever we want to do with it from here
on out and we've prepared the mine for a
deep state of meditation so if you'd
like to take this into your own
practices now and and I hope you do then
I'm going to make a couple suggestions
for my beginners please go to daily
Dharma dose calm and you're going to
look at the video on You Jay breathing
make sure you're using your joy and then
start going through those videos one at
a time and start building the sukkah
manish theorem in your practice right
because remember that step one for my
intermediates you might want to go to
daily Dharma dose calm and jump right in
with that video on traditional surya
namaskar traditional Sun salute and the
reason being that you may know the Sun
salute but after I explain how to do it
I then take you into this particular
practice of really flowing on the breath
as we do that Sun salute so it'll be a
nice way to kind of practice that right
and then for everybody if they want to
take that into a nice meditation that's
a great way to cap off this kind of
practice then go to daily dormidos calm
and look up soham meditation and that's
a beautiful meditation on the breath
with some lovely explanation as you go
along as to why you're doing what you're
doing and also how all of this ties into
those deeper states of knowing so thank
you so much for sharing your time with
me today really appreciate you being
here and I want to thank you for doing
your practice because when you do your
practice the world benefits so don't
forget get your daily dorma dose and
i'll see you on the mat
namaste